Biological Science Syllabus
1. G.K & Current Affairs

–

10M

2. Perspectives in Education

–

05M

3. Educational Psychology

–

05M

4. Category of disability specialization

–

30M

5. Content

–

20M

6. Methodology

–

10M

Total

–

80 M

PART - I
I. General Knowledge and Current Affairs (Marks: 10)
II. Perspectives in Special Education and Inclusive Education (Marks: 05)
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

1.

Philosophical Foundations of Education

2.

Understanding Diversity

3.

Contemporary Issues and Concerns

4.

Education Commissions and Policy (School Education)

5.

Issues and Trends in Education

III. Psychology with reference to CWSN – 05Marks
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

1. Approaches to Human Development
2. Theoretical Approaches to Development
3. The Early Years (Birth to Eight Years)
4. Early Adolescence (From nine years to eighteen years)
5. Transitions into Adulthood
6. Human Learning and Intelligence
7. Learning Process and Motivation
8. Teaching Learning Process

118

PART – II
I. Category of disability specialization – 30Marks
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

i. HI-Hearing Impairment
Introduction to Inclusive Education, Polices & Frameworks Facilitating Inclusive
Education, Adaptations Accommodations and Modifications, Inclusive Academic
Instructions, Supports and Collaborations for Inclusive Education, Early
Identification of Hearing Loss: Need and Strategies, Audiological Assessment,
Assessment of Language & Communication, Assessment of Speech, Educational
Assessment and Identification of Needs. Curriculum and Its' Designing, Developing
Literacy Skills: Reading, Developing Literacy Skills, Curricular Adaptation,
Curricular Evaluation. Need & Strategies for Early Intervention of Hearing Loss,
Auditory Learning (AVT & Auditory Training) & Speech Reading , Speech
Intervention Strategies, Communication and Language Teaching Strategies,
Educational Intervention Strategies Listening Devices and Classroom Acoustics,
Technology for Management for Speech, Technology Facilitating Language &
Communication, Technology Facilitating Education, Resource Mobilisation for
Technology Psychosocial Aspects and Disability, Family Needs, Family
Empowerment.

(OR)
ii. VI-Visual Impairment
Introduction to Inclusive Education, Polices & Frameworks Facilitating Inclusive
Education, Adaptations Accommodations and Modifications, Inclusive Academic
Instructions, Supports and Collaborations for Inclusive Education, Anatomy and
Physiology of Human Eye, Types of Visual Impairment and Common Eye
Disorders, Implications of Visual Impairment and Needs of Visually Impaired,
Identification and Assessment of Visual Impairment, Assessment of Learning Needs
of Children with VIMD Concept and Types of Curriculum, Teaching Functional
Academics Skills, Teaching of Independent Living Skills, Curricular Adaptation,
Curricular Activities Theoretical Perspectives, Mathematics, Science, Social
Science, Teaching of Children with Low Vision Introducing Educational and
Information Communication Technology Adaptive Technologies, Access to Print
for the Visually Impaired, Assistive Technologies for the Visually Impaired with
Reference to School Subjects and Low Vision, Computer-Aided Learning Family of
a Child with Visual Impairment, Parental Issues and Concerns, Rehabilitation of
Children with Visual Impairment, Meeting the Challenges of Children with Visual
Impairment.
II. Content (Marks: 20) (Class VI to X level syllabus)

1. LIFE PROCESS:
NUTRITION: Types of nutrition– Autotrophic, Parasitic, saprophytic, holozoic,
symbiotic; Nutrition in Plants – Photosynthesis, requirements, mechanism, contribution
of different scientists in understanding photosynthesis, Insectivorous plants; Nutrition
in animals - Different ways of taking food, Nutrition in unicellular organisms, Digestion
119

in grass eating animals, Digestion in humans - Digestive system, glands - enzymesfunctions, Types of teeth – their role.
RESPIRATION: Cellular respiration, Types of respiration – aerobic and anerobic
respirations, activities to understand respiration, Contribution of different scientists in
understanding the respiration and respiratory gases, Respiration in plants – in leaf, stem,
root, Respiration in human beings – steps in respiration, respiratory system, structure,
mechanism, transport of gases in the body, Evolution in gases exchange systempulmonary respiration, tracheal respiration, aquatic respiration, cutaneous respiration,
Comparison of Respiration with combustion, Comparison of Respiration with
Photosynthesis.
TRANSPORTATION: Circulatory system - Human Circulatory system – Heart,
Blood, Blood vessels, Functioning of heart – the cardiac cycle, heartbeat, pulse,
Lymphatic system, Blood pressure, coagulation of blood, Contribution of different
scientists in understanding of our circulatory system, Evolution of the transport
system in animals – different animals their circulatory systems, open and closed type of
circulatory systems, single and double circuit circulations, Transportation in plantstransport of water by xylem, its mechanism, Transport of mineral salts, Transport of
food by phloem.
EXCRETION: Excretion- excretory products, need of excretion, Excretion in Human
Beings – Structure of excretory system, Structure of nephrons, Mechanism of urine
formation, Composition of urine, Dialysis, Kidney transplantation, other pathways of
excretion – accessory excretory organs, Excretion in other organisms, Excretion and
release of substances in plants – Secondary metabolites - alkaloids, tannins, resin, gums,
latex Excretion Vs Secretion;
COORDINATION: Coordination in animals - Nervous coordination – Nervous
system – Nerve cell structure and function, synapse, nerve pathways, Types of neurons,
Central nervous system – Brain parts and functions, Spinal cord, reflex arc, Peripheral
nervous system – Cranial and spinal nerves, Autonomous nervous system –
Sympathetic, parasympathetic nervous systems, Endocrine system – Glands, Hormones
and functions, Feedback mechanism, Coordination in plants – Plant hormones, tropic
and nastic movements, Contribution of different scientists in understanding the
coordination process in organisms, Coordination between life process,
REPRODUCTION: Modes of reproduction – sexual, asexual and vegetative; Sexual
reproduction in plants – Structure of flower, unisexual and bisexual flowers,
pollination, Fertilization, Seed dispersal, Sexual and Asexual Reproduction in Animals,
oviparous and viviparous animals, fertilization – types, Metamorphosis, Reproduction
in a placental mammal – Man, Male and female reproductive systems, Mansuration,
Pregnancy, development of embryo, Embryonic membranes, child birth, Reproductive
health, Birth control methods, Fighting against social ills, Adolescence and puberty –
changes, role of hormones.

120

HERIDITY: Variations, Mendel’s experiments on inheritance, Mono hybrid cross,
dihybrid cross, Sex determination in human beings, Evolution – Lamarckism,
Darwinism, Evidences of evolution, Human evolution

2. LIVING WORLD:
LIVING AND NONLIVING THINGS: Characteristics of living organisms,
Different types of habitat and adaptation.
PLANTS: Types - Herbs, shrubs, trees; Plant parts – leaf, structure, venation, function,
transpiration, roots, tap root system, fibrous root system, relation with venation,
function of roots, stem - functions, flower- parts, functions.
ANIMALS: Skeletal parts – Bones, Joints, Cartilage; muscles, Movements in animals
– Earth worm, snail, cockroach, birds, fish, snakes
MICROORGANISMS: Microorganisms - types, Useful Microorganisms – Food Fermentation, Making curd, and bread, Commercial use – Alcohol, Medicinal use –
antibiotics, Vaccines, Soil fertility – Bio degradation, cleaning the environment,
nitrogen fixation, nitrogen cycle, Harmful microorganism – Pathogens, their
transmission, common diseases caused by microbes in humans, animals, plants, their
transmission, prevention. Food preservation methods including pasteurization.
Contribution of different scientists in microbiology.
CELL AND TISSUES: Cell-The basic unit of life, Cell structure and function, Types
of cells – Plant cell, animal cell, prokaryotic – eukaryotic cells, Cell organelles and their
functions, Cell theory, Cell divisions – mitosis, meiosis, Cell cycle, Contribution of
different scientists in understanding the cell structure and cell division, Animal Tissues
– Epithelial tissues, Connective tissues, Muscular tissues, Nervous tissue, Plant tissuestemporary tissues- Meristematic tissue, Permeant tissues – parenchyma, Collenchyma,
Sclerenchyma, xylem and phloem.
OUR FOOD: Components of food, Source of food, Tests for starch, proteins and fats,
Balanced diet, Malnutrition - types, causes, Deficiency diseases – Kwashiorkor,
Marasmus, Obesity, Vitamin deficiency diseases.
FOOD FROM PLANTS: Agriculture - Kharif and rabi crops, Agricultural Practices,
implements, Manure, fertilizers, crop management, patterns, irrigation methods, crop
protection. Improvement in crop yields, Storage of food,
FOOD FROM ANIMALS: Animal Husbandry – cattle forming, poultry forming,
Fisheries, Bee- keeping.

3. OUR ENVIRONMENT-ECOLOGY:
OUR ENVIRONMENT: Food chain, Food web, Ecological pyramids – pyramid of
number, pyramid of biomass, pyramid of energy, Effects of human activities on
ecosystems, Bio accumulation, bio-magnification, Steps towards prevention
NATURAL RESOURCES: Renewable and non-renewable resources, Water, Soil,
Forest, petroleum, Minerals conservation, 4Rs;
121

BIO DIVERSITY: Forests, Flora, fauna, interrelation of organisms, Advantages of
forests, Deforestation - effects, Conservation of forest and wildlife – Protecting areas,
endangered and endemic species;
AIR & WATER POLLUTIONS: Cusses, effects and prevention, Water, Sewage,
Treatment of polluted water, Better housekeeping practices, Sanitation and Disease,
Alternative arrangement for sewage disposal;
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES: Greenhouse effect, Global warming, Acid rains;
Causes, effects, preventive measures.

III. PEDAGOGY OF TEACHING SCIENCE (Marks: 10)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Nature and Significance of Science
Planning for Instruction
Approaches and Methods of Teaching Sciences
Learning Resources with reference to Children with Disabilities for Teaching Science
Evaluation

122

Government of Andhra Pradesh
Department of School Education
State Council of Educational Research & Training
DSC - 2024
Category of Post: TGT
ENGLISH Syllabus
1. G.K & Current Affairs -

-

10M

2. Perspectives in Education

-

05M

3. Classroom implications of Educational Psychology

-

05M

4. Content

-

40M

5. Methodology

-

20M

-

80 M

Total
PART - I
I. General Knowledge And Current Affairs (Marks: 10)
PART - II

II. Perspectives in Education (Marks: 05)
1. History of Education :
· The Education in Ancient India - Pre-Vedic and Post-Vedic period, Medieval
Education.
· Education in Pre Independent era - Woods Despatch (1854), Hunter
Commission (1882), Hartog Committee (1929), Sargent Committee (1944).
· Education in Post Independent era - Mudaliar Commission (1952-53), Kothari
Commission (1964-66), Ishwarbhai Patel committee (1977), NPE-1986, POA1992
2. Teacher Empowerment:
· Need, interventions for empowerment, Professional code of conduct for
teachers, Teacher motivation, Professional development of Teachers and
Teacher organizations, National / State Level Organizations for Teacher
Education, Maintenance of Records and Registers in Schools.
3. Educational Concerns in Contemporary India:
· Democracy and Education, Equality, Equity, Quality in Education, Equality of
Educational opportunities.
· Economics of Education, Education as Human Capital, Education and Human
Resource Development, Literacy - Saakshar Bharat Mission.
· Population Education, Gender - Equality, Equity and Empowerment of
Women, Urbanization and migration, Life skills.
· Adolescence Education
· Value Education – Moral Value and Professional Ethics in Education.
123

·
·
·
·

·
·

Health and Physical Education
Inclusive Education - Classroom Management in Inclusive Education
Role of Education in view of Liberalization, Privatization and Globalization
Programmes and Projects – APPEP, DPEP, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, National
Programme for Education of Girls at Elementary Level (NPEGEL), Rashtriya
Madhyamika Shiksha Abhiyan(RMSA), Rashtriya Avishkar Abhiyan (RAA),
KGBVs, Model Schools.
Incentives and special provisions – Mid Day Meals, Free Books, Scholarships,
Awards, Welfare Hostels, Transportation.
Current Trends in Education

4. Acts / Rights:
· Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act - 2009
· Right to Information Act - 2005
· Child Rights
· Human Rights.
5. National Curriculum Framework - 2005: Perspectives, Guiding Principles,

Learning and Knowledge, Teaching Learning Process, Assessments, Systemic
Reforms.
6. National education Policy -2020

PART - III
III. Classroom Implications of Educational Psychology – 05m
1. Individual differences: Inter and intra individual differences, meaning, nature and
theories of intelligence with special emphasis to multiple intelligence, IQ,
assessment of intelligence, EQ, Creativity. Attitude, Aptitude, Interest, Habit and its
Influence on Intelligence – Class room implementation.
2. Learning: Theories and approaches of learning, learning curves, Factors, Phases,
Dimensions of learning, Types of learning, Transfer of learning. Memory,
Forgetting, Learning and assessment– Class room implementation.
3. Personality: Nature, characteristics and theories of personality, factors of
Personality, Assessment of Personality, Mental health, Adjustment, Stress – nature,
Symptoms and management. Emotional intelligence, Management of emotions –
Class room implementation.

124

PART – IV
IV. Content (40 Marks)
Literature Detailed Study
LITERATURE

LEVEL OR AREA OF TESTING

Background of English
Literature

Poetical Types, Stanza forms, Schools and Movements, Dramatic
Types, The Essay, The Novel, The Short Story

Literary Terms

*Parallelism, Prologue, epilogue, setting, the character, metre,
diction, imagery, prosody, point of view, epic, mock epic,
choreography, narration, classic, chorus, comedy, tragedy,
conflict, plot, criticism, discourse, empathy, sympathy, style,
theatre,
feminism,
soliloquy,
folklore,
structure;
*Figures of Speech - Simile, Metaphor, Apostrophe,
Personification, Metonymy, Synecdoche, irony and alliteration;
*Rhyme Scheme

Poetry (Detailed Study)

1. Where the Mind Is without Fear (Rabindranath Tagore)
