Physical Science Syllabus
1. G.K & Current Affairs

–

10M

2. Perspectives in Education

–

05M

3. Educational Psychology

–

05M

4. Category of disability specialization

–

30M

5. Content

–

20M

6. Methodology

–

10M

Total

–

80 M

PART - I
I. General Knowledge and Current Affairs (Marks: 10)
II. Perspectives in Special Education and Inclusive Education (Marks: 05)
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

1.

Philosophical Foundations of Education

2.

Understanding Diversity

3.

Contemporary Issues and Concerns

4.

Education Commissions and Policy (School Education)

5.

Issues and Trends in Education

III. Psychology with reference to CWSN – 05Marks
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

1. Approaches to Human Development
2. Theoretical Approaches to Development
3. The Early Years (Birth to Eight Years)
4. Early Adolescence (From nine years to eighteen years)
5. Transitions into Adulthood
6. Human Learning and Intelligence
7. Learning Process and Motivation
8. Teaching Learning Process

111

PART – II
I. Category of disability specialization – 30Marks
(As per Rehabilitation Council of India, B.Ed. Spl.Ed Curriculum)

i. HI-Hearing Impairment
Introduction to Inclusive Education, Polices & Frameworks Facilitating
Inclusive Education, Adaptations Accommodations and Modifications, Inclusive
Academic Instructions, Supports and Collaborations for Inclusive Education,
Early Identification of Hearing Loss: Need and Strategies, Audiological
Assessment, Assessment of Language & Communication, Assessment of Speech,
Educational Assessment and Identification of Needs. Curriculum and Its'
Designing, Developing Literacy Skills: Reading, Developing Literacy Skills,
Curricular Adaptation, Curricular Evaluation. Need & Strategies for Early
Intervention of Hearing Loss, Auditory Learning (AVT & Auditory Training) &
Speech Reading , Speech Intervention Strategies, Communication and Language
Teaching Strategies, Educational Intervention Strategies Listening Devices and
Classroom Acoustics, Technology for Management for Speech, Technology
Facilitating Language & Communication, Technology Facilitating Education,
Resource Mobilisation for Technology Psychosocial Aspects and Disability,
Family Needs, Family Empowerment.

(OR)
ii. VI-Visual Impairment
Introduction to Inclusive Education, Polices & Frameworks Facilitating
Inclusive Education, Adaptations Accommodations and Modifications, Inclusive
Academic Instructions, Supports and Collaborations for Inclusive Education,
Anatomy and Physiology of Human Eye, Types of Visual Impairment and
Common Eye Disorders, Implications of Visual Impairment and Needs of
Visually Impaired, Identification and Assessment of Visual Impairment,
Assessment of Learning Needs of Children with VIMD Concept and Types of
Curriculum, Teaching Functional Academics Skills, Teaching of Independent
Living Skills, Curricular Adaptation, Curricular Activities Theoretical
Perspectives, Mathematics, Science, Social Science, Teaching of Children with
Low Vision Introducing Educational and Information Communication
Technology Adaptive Technologies, Access to Print for the Visually Impaired,
Assistive Technologies for the Visually Impaired with Reference to School
Subjects and Low Vision, Computer-Aided Learning Family of a Child with
Visual Impairment, Parental Issues and Concerns, Rehabilitation of Children with
Visual Impairment, Meeting the Challenges of Children with Visual Impairment.
II. Content (Marks: 20) ( Class VI To X level syllabus)
1. MEASUREMENT
Story of transport, Non- standard units of Measurements, Measuring the length of a Curved
line, Measurement of length, area, volume and time. CGS and SI units of length, area,
volume and time, Conversion of units from CGS to S.I and Vice versa.

112

2. MOTION
Describing Motion, Motion and Rest, Motion Along a Straight Line, Types of motion
(Translatory, Rotatory and oscillatory), Scalars and vectors, Distance, Displacement,
Speed, Velocity, Average speed, Average velocity, Acceleration, Graphical Representation
of Motion, Distance-Time Graphs, Velocity-Time Graphs, Uniform Motion and NonUniform Motion, Equations of Motion, Uniform Circular Motion, Laws of Motion,
Balanced and Unbalance Forces, First Law of Motion, Inertia and Mass, Momentum,
Second Law of Motion, Third law of motion.
3. FORCE, FRICTION AND PRESSURE
Force – A Push or a Pull, Exploring Forces, Effect of Force on Objects, Types of forces
(ﬁeld force and contact force), Net force, Types of friction (static, Sliding and Rolling),
Factors effecting Friction, Friction: A Necessary Evil, Increasing and Reducing Friction,
Fluid friction, Pressure, Pressure Exerted by Liquids and Gases, Pressure of liquids at
dierent depths, Atmospheric Pressure.
4. GRAVITATION
Uniform circular motion, Universal law of gravitation, Free Fall, Acceleration due to
Gravity, Motion of Objects Under the Influence of Gravitational Force of the Earth, Mass
and Weight, Thrust and Pressure, Pressure in Fluids, Buoyancy, Floating and Sinking
Objects, Archimedes’ Principle.
5. WORK, ENERGY
Scientific Conception of Work, Work Done by a Constant Force, Energy, Forms of Energy,
Kinetic Energy, Potential Energy, Mechanical Energy. Law of Conservation of Energy,
Conversion of Energy from one form to another, Power and its units.
6. SOUND
Sound - a form of energy, Production of sound, Some musical instruments, Sound Needs a
Medium for Propagation, Human ear, Hearing Impairment, Noise and Music, Propagation
of Sound, Types of waves (longitudinal and transverse), Characteristics of sound waves
(Wavelength, Frequency, Time period, Speed of the wave), Relation between frequency
and time period, Pitch, Loudness and Quality, Intensity of Sound, Speed Of Sound in
Different Media, Reflection of Sound, Echo, Reverberation, Uses of Multiple Reflection of
Sound, Range of Hearing, Infrasonic and Ultrasonics, Applications of Ultrasound, Sound
pollution.
7. HEAT
Heat and temperature, Transfer of Heat (Conduction, convection, radiation), Kinds of
clothes we wear in summer and winter, Units of temperature (centigrade, Fahrenheit and
Kelvin; Conversions), Expansion of liquids due to heat, Types of thermometers, Thermal
equilibrium, Temperature and Kinetic energy, Specific Heat, Applications of Specific heat
capacity, Principle of method of mixtures, Determination of Specific heat of a solid,
Evaporation, Condensation, Humidity, Dew and Fog, Boiling, Latent heat of vapourisation,
Melting, Latent heat of fusion, Freezing, Temperature- time graph.

113

8. LIGHT
Light, Transparent, Opaque and Translucent Objects, Shadows and Images, Rectilinear
Propagation of Light, A Pinhole Camera, Regular and Diffused Reflection, Reﬂection of
light by plane surfaces (laws of reﬂection, periscope, multiple images, kaleidoscope,
Characteristics of image formed by plane mirrors), Spherical Mirrors and Images,
Spectrum, Wave nature of light, Fermat principle, Sign convention, Refraction, Refraction
of Light at Plane Surfaces, Refractive index, Absolute refractive index, Relative refractive
index, Snell’s law, Critical angle, Total Internal Reflection, Applications of total internal
reflection, Mirages, Optical fibres, Refraction Through a Glass Slab, Lateral shift, Vertical
shift, Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces, Lenses, Terminology used in the case of
lenses -Focal length, Focus, Optic Centre, Principal axis, Radius of curvature, Centre of
curvature, Focal plane, Behaviour of certain light rays when they are incident on a lens,
Images formed by lenses for various distances of objects, UV method, Lens formula, Lens
maker’s formula, Human Eye, Least distance of distinct vision, Angle of vision, Myopia,
Hypermetropia, Presbyopia, Care of the Eyes, Braille System, Visually Impaired Persons,
Power of lens, Refractive index of a Prism, Dispersion of light through prism,
Sunlight-Dispersion, Rainbow, Scattering of light.
9. ELECTRICITY
Simple Electric circuit and its components, Conductors, Insulators, Type of cells (Dry and
liquid), Electric symbols and uses,
Series and parallel connection of cells and bulbs,
Heating eﬀects of Electricity, Understanding of CFL, Fuse and MCBs, Chemical Effects
Of Electric Current, Good/Poor Conducting Liquids, Electroplating, Magnetic Effects of
Electric Current, Electromagnet, Electric bell, Electric current, Drude and Lorentz theory,
Potential diﬀerence and EMF, Drift velocity and working of a cell, Ohm's law, Electric
shock, Factors affecting the resistance, Series connection of resistors, Parallel Connection
of resistors, Multi-meter, Kirchhoff’s laws, Sign convention in a circuit, Electric power,
Power consumption, Electric energy, Overload.
10. MAGNETISM AND ELECTROMAGNETISM
How Magnets were discovered, Magnetic and Non-Magnetic Materials, Types of Magnets,
Poles of Magnet, Properties of Magnets, Storing magnets safely, Magnetic compass, Earth
as a Magnet, Magnetic Induction, Oersted's experiment, Magnetic Field, Magnetic flux –
Magnetic flux density, Magnetic field due to straight wire /circular coil/solenoid carrying
current, Magnetic Force, Electric Motor, Electromagnetic induction, Faraday’s Law, Lenz
Law, Applications of Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction, Induced current, Induced
EMF, Electric generator, DC and AC currents, rms values.
11. PRINCIPLES OF METALLURGY
Metallurgy, Occurrence of the metals in nature, Ores and Minerals, Extraction of metals,
Activity series, Concentration or Dressing of the ore, Hand picking, Washing, Froth
flotation, Magnetic Separation, Extraction of crude metal from the ore, Reduction of
purified ore to the metal, Purification of the crude metal, Distillation, Poling, Liquation,
Electrolytic refining, Corrosion, Prevention of corrosion, Thermite process, Smelting,
Roasting, Calcination, Flux, Gangue, Blast furnace, Reverberatory furnace.

114

12. CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
Allotropes of Carbon, Amorphous forms, Crystalline forms, Diamond, Graphite,
Buckminsterfullerene, Nanotubes, Versatile nature of Carbon, Catenation, Tetravalency,
Hydrocarbons, Saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons, Homologous series, Isomerism,
Functional groups, Nomenclature of Aliphatic Hydrocarbons, IUPAC names, Chemical
properties of carbon compounds- Combustion, Oxidation reactions, Addition reactions,
Substitution reactions, Ethanol, Ethanoic acid, Esters, Esterification Reactions, Soaps –
Saponification and Micelles, Cleansing action of soap, Detergents.
13. SOME NATURAL PHENOMENON
The Story of Lightning, charging by Rubbing, Electric charge and properties of electric
charge, Types of charges and their interactions, Transfer of charge, lightning, lightning
safety, lightning conductors, Earthquake, Tsunami, Causes and eﬀects, Protective
measures.
14. STARS AND SOLAR SYSTEM
The Moon, The Moon’s Surface, Phases of Moon, Eclipses (Solar and lunar eclipses), The
Stars, Movement of Stars (Constellation, pole star), Movement of the sun, Solar System,
Planets and Some Other Members of the Solar System, Artiﬁcial Satellites.
15. CHANGES AROUND US
Slow/fast changes, Temporary/permanent changes, Natural/man made changes, Physical/
chemical changes, Rusting of iron, Crystallisation, Galvanization, Corrosion, Rancidity,
Oxidation / reduction
16. MATTER
Objects Around Us, Properties of Materials, Physical Nature of Matter, Characteristics of
Particles of Matter, States of matter, Properties of solids, liquids and gases, Change of state
of Matter –effect of change of temperature and pressure, Evaporation, Factors Affecting
Evaporation, Sublimation, Deposition, Boiling, Latent heat of vaporisation, Latent heat of
fusion, Mixture, Types of Mixtures, Solutions., Properties of a Solution, Types of
Solutions, Concentration of solution, Expressing Concentration of Solutions, Suspension,
Properties of a Suspension, Colloidal Solution, Properties of a Colloid, Common examples
of colloids, Mixtures, Methods of separation–handpicking, Threshing, Winnowing,
Sedimentation, Decantation, Sieving,
Filtration, Sublimation, Chromatography,
Distillation and fractional distillation, Evaporation, Condensation, Use of more than one
method of separation, Saturated and unsaturated solutions, Separation of immiscible
liquids, Types of Pure Substances – Elements and Compounds.
17. ATOMS AND MOLECULES
Laws of Chemical Combination - Law of Conservation Of Mass, Law of Constant
Proportions, Atom, Symbols of Atoms of Different Elements, Atomic Mass, Atomicity,
Valency, Molecule, Molecules Of Elements, Molecules Of Compounds, Ion – Cation &
Anion, Polyatomic ions, Names and symbols of ions, Formation of ions, Writing
Chemical Formulae, Molecular Mass, Molar mass, Formula Unit Mass, Structure of The
Atom, Subatomic particles, Charged Particles in Matter, Thomson’s Model of an Atom,
Rutherford’s Model of an Atom, Bohr’s Model of an Atom, Bohr-Sommerfeld model
115

of an atom, Neutrons, Distribution of electrons into different Orbits, Atomic Number and
Mass Number, Isotopes, Isobars, Atomic line spectra, Planck’s quantum theory, Quantum
numbers, Shapes of orbitals, Electronic Configuration, Pauli Exclusion Principle, Aufbau
principle, Hund’s Rule.
18. CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS-THE PERIODIC TABLE
Dobereiner’s law of Triads, Newlands’ law of Octaves, Mendeleev’s Periodic Table,
Modern Periodic Table, Periodic properties of the elements and their gradation in the
modern periodic table.
19. CHEMICAL BONDING
Lewis dot structures, Covalency, Electronic theory of valence by Lewis and Kossel, Octet
rule, Ionic and Covalent bonds, Ionic and Covalent compounds, Bond lengths and Bond
energies of covalent bonds, Valence shell electron pair repulsion theory, Valence bond
theory, Hybridisation.
20. METALS AND NON METALS
Physical Properties of Metals and Non-metals, Chemical Properties of Metals and
Non-metals, Uses of Metals and Non-metals, Examples of metals and non-metals,
Reactivity order of metals.
21. SYNTHETIC FIBRES AND PLASTICS
Natural and Synthetic ﬁbres, Preparation and uses, Types of Synthetic Fibres,
Characteristics of Synthetic Fibres, Plastics as Materials of Choice, Types of plastics,
Plastics and environment, Biodegradable – Non biodegradable materials.
22. COAL AND PETROLEUM
Exhaustible and inexhaustible Resources, Fuels – Types, Coal, Story of Coal, Uses of Coal
and Coal products, Reﬁning of petroleum, Petrochemical products in various sectors,
Various Constituents of Petroleum and their Uses, Formation of coal and petroleum,
Natural Gas, Misuse of Energy resources and Consequences.
23. COMBUSTION FUELS AND FLAME
Combustion, Types of Combustion, Ignition temperature, Inflammable substances, Flame,
Fuel Efficiency, Burning of Fuels Leads to Harmful Products, Fire control, Structure of
ﬂame – colors zones – Intensities.
24. AIR
Atmosphere, Components of air, Availability of oxygen to plants and animals,
Replacement of Oxygen in the Atmosphere.
25. ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Natural acid-base indicators, Synthetic acid-base Indicators, Olfactory indicators,
Universal Indicator, Chemical properties of Acids and Bases, Reaction of Acids and bases
with Metals, Reaction of Acids with carbonates and metal hydrogen Carbonates,
Neutralization reaction, Reaction of Acids with metal oxides, Reaction of base with
non-metal oxide, Production of H+ions and OH- ions, Electrical conductivity of Acids and
116

Bases, Properties of Bases, Dilution, Strength of acid or base, pH scale, Importance of pH
in everyday life, Self defense by animals and plants through chemical warfare, Family of
salts, pH of Salts, Chemicals from common salt, Important product from chlor-alkali
process and their uses, Water of crystallization, Common salt, Bleaching Powder, Baking
soda, Washing soda, Plaster of paris, Gypsum, and their uses.
III. PEDAGOGY OF TEACHING SCIENCE (Marks: 10)
1. Nature and Significance of Science
2. Planning for Instruction
3. Approaches and Methods of Teaching Sciences
4. Learning Resources with reference to Children with Disabilities for Teaching Science
5. Evaluation

117

Government of Andhra Pradesh
Department of School Education
State Council of Educational Research & Training
DSC - 2024
Category of Post: TGT _ Special Education
Biological Science Syllabus
